The Joe Rogan experience. So you just assumed in the U S years.
Back decades before there's some,
some kettlebells were used by some old time strong men, like Zig Klein,
for example. And there was a company named Milo,
no relations to the magazine really.
Was about a hundred years ago with Milo.
Milo's the guy who carried the, uh, the calf. So if you'll go, if you look,
um, okay.
The progressive overload is usually explained as this legend of Milo
of Crotona.
So this guy started carrying a little calf on his shoulders and he would carry
the calf every day.
So the calf would grow and eventually a guy became very strong.
So that's why that name is present in, uh,
in the strengths game. So back then today, it is a,
just one of the finest publications on strength, training, mostly niche things,
again like gripping. I.
Wonder if anyone's actually done that, like carry a cow,
isn't it amazing that something can grow physically faster than you
can keep lifting? It.
Absolutely can, but you know, your typical training plan that people say,
I'm going to add five pounds on my bench press today,
and I'm going to do this every week.
And that by Christmas I'll be the world champion and it just doesn't work.
So the rate of adaptation is such that your body just cannot do that.
And it's cyclical in nature.
So you have to do put it in the Milo terms. Uh,
you have to, after you carry the calf for a while, it grows,
you have to back off to a lighter calf and start, you know,
start building up again. Why we did not know exactly.
So for some reason that unidirectional adaptation, just in one Newnham,
we're getting stronger at the bench press, or what have you,
or at carrying the calf, he just cannot proceed indefinitely.
There's some fatigue of some and a crane mechanisms, some genetic mechanisms.
We do not know that, but tactically,
we do have a tricks of the trade to beat that,
to work around that. And there's a number of ways of doing that,
the oldest way of doing that.
And it's very smart, still very smart for a lot of people, they would call this,
I think, possibly constant weight training or something like that,
but the soil has described it as step loading. So let's look at your typical,
let's look at your typical beginner, somebody in the gym.
And so the personal starts lifting whatever weight for whatever
reps and the next week,
let's say next week he has five pounds and he does it again.
And he does it again while the Soviet has figured out that it's much better for
him to stay at the same weight for several weeks and
then make it bigger jump. Hmm. So what's, you're doing pretty much as you are.
The making that uptake is more stable and it just happened in the cellar
levels. Members become stronger and so on, but old timers just,
they would say that you are solidifying the gains.
So the way that many old timers trained is they would just stick to the same
weight and the staying with the same weight for long time in the beginning is
challenging. And then it becomes kind of comfortable.
That becomes almost easy and there were dumped up.
So that just one way of doing it. And today it's not unprecedented either.
If you look at, uh, Chris som or his gymnastics coach used that rigidness,
it's very common. I use that tactic with my latest edition of my kettlebell,
simple sinister,
because it's much more reliable than just progressive overload.
And also because psychologically,
first of all, it weeds out the impatient people.
So you're told to stay with the same load for a while. Some people automatic.
So forget it. I can not do that. Well,
I don't want these people for my stuff anyway. And second,
so you're staying with this weight or these reps for some time
in the beginning,
they challenge you and then sometime goes by and suddenly they don't anymore.
So just a very much, it was a very clear, clear sense of accomplishment.
So this is called step loading or using the old
timers old Dharma's terminology, that constant weight training.
If you look at the other ways of making progress.
So another approach is called cycling and cycling.
So the one that I just described that would really be,
if we could artificially stop the growth of the calf, like, okay,
stop growing for a while, which we can,
but the cycling, this is where I mentioned earlier.
This is where you go back to a lighter calf.
So the classic American powerlifting, uh, training template,
this is cycling. So the history of cycling is very interesting.
Again, what cycling is cycling is in the simplest possible terms.
You take 12 weeks, you start with lightweights. Uh,
you build up until you go really heavy.
And that was the predominant strength training system in
the seventies, in the eighties.
And that was the strength system behind the dominant American
powerlifting team. So lifters like Eddie cone, Kurt Kowalski,
lifters, like Dan Austin, who is, uh, or Lamar Gant,
whose death of trekkers still stand decades after the use this
classic cycling. So the classic cycling,
you start with the moderate, moderately challenging load.
Then you keep proceeding, go heavier and heavier and heavier. Then you compete.
Then you start over and to give you,
um, to give you a very simple tactic,
that's something that your listeners can use in their training,
whether they follow this cycling format where they do
something else,
is that Russian scientists discovery that your endocrine system
pretty much can take, uh, two, two weeks out of four of heavy loading.
That's just the way it is. There are some exceptions. If you forget exceptions,
generally just two weeks of heavy loading.
And if you look at the classic power lifting cycles by
let's say Marty Gallagher. So for four weeks, you do sets of eight,
four weeks as a five, four weeks sets of three.
And in week one,
you start out with a way that's comfortable in week two,
moderately challenging in week three,
you hit your repeat your previous PR for this reps.
And in week four, you set your new PR and then you jumped in the next rep count.
So as you see in this particular template,
you have two weeks, two hard weeks of training out of the month.
And that's just one of the many ways of doing that. Pardon me? I got distracted.
So we wanted to talk about the history of cycling. Yeah. So bill Starr,
who was a huge name in the game, he, uh,
he was a former, uh,
top weightlifter in the United States back in the sixties later on very
successful coach strength coach and, uh, author.
The strongest shall survive his, uh,
book on strength training for football remains one of the best strength
training books and bill starry calls that
American lifters started getting a whiff of some Russian paradise
programs.
So was puritization puritization the simplest terms is planning your training
according to certain principles to, and it beak performance.
So that's just the really kind of a 50,000 level, 50,000 foot,
uh, definition. And they did not have their full, full information bio.
It was done. So they just decided to do exactly that.
And that was a very successful,
very successful purchase strength training.
It does not necessarily work for everybody. There are some reasons for that,
uh, mostly because of your sport competition, if you're an athlete,
but it's extremely a factor as was shown on the platform. And finally,
so first we discussed step cycling, step loading,
which is concentrating second, we discussed, uh,
uh, wave cycling, which is just cycling, right wave loading.
And the third one would be the variable loading and variable
loadings is extremely unique. It's unlike something else.
So here's how variable loading works in variable loading.
You have certain load parameters, like for example,
you will know that your average training weights will be
75% of your maximum.
You will know that you will perform for example,
300 squats per month or whatever.
So these numbers are arrived at experimentally over decades,
and what variable loading does as
opposed to the traditional methods.
Traditional progressive overload is that the jump in volume,
for example,
from one training unit to another one day,
one week, one month, and so on, it's at least 20%. So the jumps are really high,
really high. The variable loading was developed by,
I feel Sarah [inaudible]
, who was a Olympic weightlifting champion, and he was the premier sport
scientist. So he argued that in nature, most changes are discreet
during a gradual they're discreet
. So whatever, whatever adapt adaptation take place in your body, the same thing, whatever happens with many physical process, chemical processes and so on. So he concluded that training has to be highly variable. So you understand what I mean? That it's a 20% minimal change. We called that Delta 20 principle. It doesn't mean
that's constantly going up. That's just not possible. He'd
goes up and down. He just keeps woot
blushing. So if we use, if we go back to the traditional cycling as an example, the traditional cycling, so it's a linear
buildup back up a little linear buildup, back up
a little in contrast variable overload. It's going crazy.
It's going to lean sane. In fact,
this is a little entertaining,
experienced strength coaches, and, uh,
especially people with some sort of a background in mathematics.
They're able to dissect and analyze training plans from other coaches.
You can look at a plan. You can take an experienced powerlifting coach,
show him a program from another coach.
And the coach will be able to tell whether this will work or not who this will
work for and so on, and kind of figure out,
what's figure out what's under the hood right there.
So there's a very clear pattern, variable overload.
So it's like a photograph it's very clear variable overload.
If you start analyzing the pattern, looking at the program. So for example,
buddy, Shane Koa, he's, uh, uh,
he's a former coach of Russian national powerlifting team.
So he took the Soviet Olympic weightlifting methodology
and directly applied it to powerlifting. So he's blind,
so made their way to the west and some lifters use them very successfully.
But whenever he tried to read this plan and try to make any sense of that,
it just drives you crazy because you see like, okay, here's a string.
Here's a pattern is going right here in submit his gun.
So if traditional cycling's like clear
photograph,
the variable overload makes me think of,
remember in Ferris, Bueller's day off where the kid is looking at. Uh,
so house painting and, you know, want to use their, all these dots right there.
So when you step away, you see something,
when you start getting closer to so a whole bunch of dots, it just disappears.
So what's the story behind that? So the story is this,
this method,
the Soviet Olympic weightlifting method was developed,
uh, over several decades by a number of coaches by number of scientists.
So it's a very much collaborative effort. So VRBO was one for sure,
[inaudible] Chuck a number of others.
And it was a very brief bite before even
dissecting this method. Let me tell you how, how successful this method was.
You can look up the world that weightlifting records in Olympic weightlifting,
and you hear about oldest different records side by this lifter that left her
and so on and so forth.
If you few people realize that the international weightlifting
Federation has changed the weight classes at two or three times
since the eighties.
And the reason they did that is to erase the
drug. The record said by the drug taking athletes back then, of course you all,
I'm very happy that as soon as they changed the weight classes,
lifter stopped taking drugs like that.
So if you look at these records, kilo per kilo,
pound per pound, and if you charred them,
compared them to what they did then to what they do today,
you will find that while they did catch up.
And if you weight classes and about half of these classes,
the records from the eight is still stand. So for example, what
[inaudible] did in 1980 at a 82
kilos,
he totaled 400 kills in the snatch and the clean and jerk that's never been done
before. And unify banana was a wire. He guy,
you wouldn't have been taken for a lifter, just amazing. So first of all,
the system still remains. If we're just take a very large, big picture,
50,000 foot look at strength, there are great many ways of getting strong.
Some of them very good, some are mediocre, some very bad,
but historically in lifting sports,
the two systems that have been predominant are the Soviet weight lifting
system and the American classic power lifting system from the seventies and
eighties. Okay. So that was a kind of a long detour to
before tell you why the stuff that they figured out back in 1960 is why it
matters just to say it still is the best is still rules.
So what they did is, was very empirical
in, for example, when you're studying endurance, going into the cell, uh,
studying the biochemistry of this cell in the body, taking it apart,
figuring out how this works is very helpful, very on the other hand,
when you're dealing with strength, that approach has been, uh,
not really effective. So if we talk about muscle muscle training, for example,
hypertrophy, we still have no idea what the hell is going on. So we can,
we know which buttons to push, but that just empirical knowledge,
that's not the understanding of the cell. So.
We really don't understand hypertrophy drilling. No, we do not. Wow.
No, and let's, I'll be happy to talk about this, but if you don't mind,
let me just finish on this variable overload in the Soviet weightlifting system.
So what they did, even though they also, you know, they cut the muscle,
look at that as well. It just didn't learn as much,
but they coaches program particular lows for athletes and watch what happened.
And then they watched how the authors performed and the watch how the top
athletes perform and look for patterns. And there were very open-minded.
So they're not thinking like, well, it's got to be just the heaviest weights.
We'll do that. Or it's gotta be the training to failure is going to do that.
It's not the case.
So just to give you an example of how
enormous that undertaking was. So typical strength training studies,
what six weeks for some untrained college subjects, you know,
guys who are just on their phones,
but I feel something that the [inaudible] was also world champion.
He studied the training lows off top weightlifters,
all the, when they were successful in competition for four Olympic cycles, four.
So we're talking about 16 years and then somebody else to do for another cycle.
And they're just an amazing patterns just emerged. So for instance,
I'm going to give you, give you a run down what the patterns are.
There are certain optimal volumes, how much exercise you do there,
certain optimal intensities.
So if you follow the variable overload method,
the optimal intensity.
So the average intensity would be about 75% of your max,
which for most people will be probably somewhere like eight traps or something
you could do maybe 10 and maybe eight. And
you will see that about half of old, the lifts that you do are about 75,
80% now, where do all the rest, the other lifts come in.
So there's a normal distribution. So you'll find that 75,
80% are in the top 80, 85, a little bit lower, you know?
So the lighter weights,
like 60% are in the bottom and they have your waist,
like 90% in and higher are in the bottom as well. So the figured out,
you just have to do most of your work with these average weights.
They're not so light, so you're going to respect them,
but they're not so happy that you're having any question about performing,
lifting them correctly. So,
and then there is another aspect of intensity is just doing some heavier lifts,
very,
very carefully measured number of heavy lifts in addition like
90% or whatever, or occasionally,
then they figured out the proper volumes. Just to give you an idea,
if you're looking at, uh, let's say in, you know,
you might be doing 30 reps of given exercise per session. What have you,
although there's variability,
but then there's also something else that's very interesting is the optimal
number of repetitions with the given weight.
And this is what hurts people hurts. People's hats. If you look at it,
the weights from 70 to 90%,
the optimal number of repetitions are
one third to two thirds of your maximum.
So let me give you an example to the reader, uh, to the listener.
Let's say that you're lifting a 10 rep max weight.
So you go all out as hard as possible.
You can do 10 reps in training.
You should be doing, uh,
you should be doing three to six reps, that's it? That's that's the window.
And why is that? And we have no idea, but the scientists,
like in this case that it was, I think it was mud.
VF was involved in that the father of [inaudible]. I think he
was one of the scientists they experiment with all sorts of wrap
ranges. And they figured out that a directs are too low to be
given a weight. You don't get stronger. If the Rams get
too high, either the athlete gets hurt or he's technique is
compromised, or he's just unable to perform the optimal volume. So, pretty much roughly you're looking at doing about half of the reps
you're capable of that's it.
And people can argue with this all they want, like,
what's the science behind this? There's no science.
We don't know the science is purely empirical.
This particular method is purely empirical. It worked for decades.
It still does. And as one of the ways you can get strong. So in,
we have, uh, we have sorry,
step loading, which is where he stayed with the same way for a while,
where the same reps, whatever, and then make a sudden jump.
That's the best way to train for beginners.
Usually we have wave loading or
cycling, which is we build up, jump back and build up again.
And we have variable loading, which is almost almost chaotic.
We're just constantly surprised the body with what we're throwing at it,
but who do that within very narrow parameters.
So this method was purely developed by studying
winners and winners is where they.
Finally took that. But the studies were done at every level. So for example,
coaches in the field would conduct something called Pell pedagogical
experiments, which is, which is a study. That's not quite as,
um, not quite as scientifically solid, but is too good enough.
So the first would test things out, lower level athletes,
and they'll finally take it to higher level athletes.
So the things that I'm telling you about,
they have been universally effective for athletes above the beginner
level. And of course there are some subtle changes as you progress.
There are some subtleties, like for instance,
a notice that I said that you have to use some heavy lifts, like 90%,
95%, but it has to be very surgical about how many. So for instance,
beginners do none advanced lifters need to do just some but not many
intermediate lifters can do the most or heavy.
The weightlifters can do not as many lighter ones can do more.
So there are some differences at different levels,
but the principles fundamental are the same. And.
Do these principles apply whether people are taking drugs or not. They do.
The differences. In fact,
the [inaudible] made a very strong case,
a very strong case of that.
They use the Soviet euphemism for that. It was restoratives.
And they said, this is universal. Even with restorative was or not.
The difference for this for the drugs would be,
is just that the volumes will be higher. You'll be able to train more.
That's pretty much the difference, but the body will still work the same way.
Now these principles have they caught on in the United States. I mean,
they've caught on with strong first. I know that you teach,
you implement these and people teach these,
but is this something that's universally sort of accepted or is it still
something that people are cautiously curious about? It's.
Definitely not universal in part because people don't know about it in part,
you have to implement this correctly. So right now there's several,
there's several areas where you would see that is, um, well, one,
obviously the buddy shake goes power lifting programs that have been imported by
these by power lifters. The other is we have the program called plan strong,
which is when again,
this is a very faithful representation of the Soviet weightlifting
system, but applied to general strength exercises like squats, deadlifts,
and so on. And the other thing, what we'll also do,
and this is what we do with, uh, with, with the military and so on and so forth.
We have some simple programs, very simple programs that are designed,
um,
using this Delta 20 principle and using this optimal loads that
they just go out and use.
The nice thing is unlike progressive overload cycling,
if something happens, you've got a problem here or there is some variability.
So in summary to say, no, it's not wide. Leno is not.
Now in the United States. Yeah. Let's fix it. And
it makes sense. And one of the things that I really like,
what you're saying about is completing the adaptation with your
tendons and your ligaments and all these different things that oftentimes are
injured when you're ramping up your weightlifting.
And you're trying to increase the amount of weight you carry. So this,
this principle of maintaining at a similar weight for a long time,
allowing your body to complete that adaptation, that makes a lot of sense.
Adaptations need to be stable. And it does.
It's not true just for strength training.
If you're looking at endurance as well,
the adaptations and the mitochondria as well, the,
you can get some acute adaptation. So very short term like, oh, you know,
bigger, whatever guns in six weeks or faster 400 meters, six weeks. Yes,
you can do that, but these adaptations are transient.
So it takes time for things to really get got solidified.
And also if you're more patient with your progression
as while you're going to find that your gains are much more stable,
if you take some time off, which is important for anybody, you travel,
you get sick. Uh, some other thing happens.
So if you have been training in a manner where you're not forcing yourself,
okay,